

This file explains the execution of the latency tests located in the
tests/latency subdirectory.  The file 'test-commands' in that directory
contains a summary of how to execute the entire suite of latency tests
as described below.  It is presented in a pseudo script style using bash
variable and executable syntax.

These tests are intended to gather latency performance information for
various message sizes using the available transports.  The data rate
for all tests is set to 100 messages per second for all message sizes.
Detailed latency data is gathered for the last 5,000 samples of the test.
Summary data is gathered for all samples received during the test.

The test consists of two hosts, with a originating publication and
terminating subscription executing in a single process on one host, and
the other host executing a single process that subscribes to the
originating publication and republishes the samples on a separate
partition to reach the terminating subscription.  This allows full
path timing information to be measured using the same system clock.  The
latency data gathered is then divided by 2 to account for the 2 hops in
the test topology.

This discussion assumes that OpenDDS and the OpenDDS Bench software have
been built and can be executed on each host participating in the test.
See the 'doc/tests' documentation file for more information about how
to setup the Bench software.

There is a process configuration file for each message size to be tested
located in the tests/latency directory.  The sizes are:

  file            size (bytes)
  --------------  ------------
  p1-50.ini       50
  p1-100.ini      100
  p1-250.ini      250
  p1-500.ini      500
  p1-1000.ini     1000
  p1-2500.ini     2500
  p1-5000.ini     5000
  p1-8000.ini     8000
  p1-16000.ini    16000
  p1-32000.ini    32000

Another process configuration file for the remote host is also included.
It configures the second process to receive data from one partition and
then republish it on a different partition.  This file is:

  file
  ------
  p2.ini

There is a transport configuration file for each transport type that
defines the transport index values used in the individual test
configuration files.  These include:

  file                      transport
  -----------------------   ---------------------
  transport-multi-be.ini    best effort multicast
  transport-multi-rel.ini   reliable multicast
  transport-tcp.ini         TCP
  transport-udp.ini         UDP
  transport-rtps.ini        RTPS real-time publish-subscribe

The 'transport-udp.ini' configuration file needs to be edited for each
test host to specify the host or IP address to listen on.

To execute the tests use the 'bin/run_test' script provided to ensure
that the test processes are started with the correct parameters.
For more information about the available command line arguments run:

  bin/run_test --man

In addition to the test processes, a repository will need to be started.
Ideally the repository will execute on a host other than one of the
two participating in the data exchange, but this is not required.
Operation of the repository is restricted to the setup and teardown of
the test and there is no activity with the repository during the data
passing portions of the test.

Start the repository at a reachable endpoint:

  bin/run_test -S -h iiop://<hostname>:2809

If all hosts participating in the test are unable to resolve the
<hostname>, then replace it with the specific IP address to be used by each
participating host.  Port 2809 is the default ORB port to listen on, if
this conflicts with another instance of an ORB you may need to use a
different port.

Run the tests by executing the two processes on two hosts.  On each
host, execute:

  run_test -P -t <runtime> -h <hostname>:2809 -i <transportconfig> -s <testconfig>

The test will not start until the associations have been made, so the
processes can be started in any order.  However it is best to have the
orginating publisher end the test, so starting it first is preferred.

Once a test has completed, the latency results will be in the current
directory where the originating process (on the first host) was started
with a name including the message size of the test.  This includes
both per hop and full path information.  The summary data is for all
received samples while the latency for the last 5,000 samples recieved
is also stored.  If the two hosts are not synchronized closely, the per
hop information will be of limited value.

